--- 
id: 403
author: Daniel Huckstep
title: Atwood's Law Misunderstood
category: editorial
description: People lose their shit over a post by Jeff Atwood and I, naturally, have my own take on it.
published: true
publishedon: 17 Aug 2009 08:00 MDT
slugs: 
- atwood-s-law-misunderstood
tags: 
- jeff-atwood
- michael-braude
---
Jeff Atwood, of [Coding Horror](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/) and
[stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/) fame made a blog post
entitled [All Programming is Web
Programming](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/archives/001296.html)

Go read it, and come back, I'll wait.

Okay back? Good

I was originally just going to comment but then I realized the scroll
bar couldn't get any smaller on my browser and the page size was
probably close to some sort of limit, so that idea went out the window.
So here goes…

First off, Michael Braude seems a bit off his rocker. A few bits short
of a full Unicode character, if you will. If you *just* read the parts
quoted by Atwood, you'd think this. If you read the full post and also
[this](http://michaelbraude.blogspot.com/2009/05/why-ill-never-be-web-guy.html?showComment=1249410673541#c6988159394024799701)
comment by Braude, you'll see that by *web 'programming'* he mainly
means the HTML and Javascript portion, not the server side portion. In
his post he does, however, whine about throwing together a simple
ASP.NET page. But really, somebody could just as easily drop some
controls around and make a simple desktop app and not have to know
anything about what Braude talks about. But enough about that.

If either Atwood or Braude are actually 100% serious, they've lost it.
Braude's side is filled with his fairly forceful opinion that web
programmers are essentially idiots (again, keeping in mind he probably -
nay, hopefully - means those who simply stick to basic HTML and
Javascript).

> The reason most people want to program for the web is that they're not
> smart enough to do anything else.

And he's got a point: it doesn't take much skill to make pretty pictures
appear inside a web browser.

Atwood, on the other hand, goes in completely the opposite direction. Is
his post simply well crafted sarcastic and ironic linkbait, as one
commenter suggested?

As a number of comments on Atwood's post point out (which further
reinforce the previous hypothesis) all programming will not be on the
web. You need some sort of OS to run the browser, you need servers with
an OS to run the webserver, you need embedded systems powering the
network switches and everything else. So maybe all the *application*
programming will be web programming, but certainly not all programming.

I think what I like most about these two blog posts are the comments.
Some point obvious flaws in the logic of the writer, like how Braude
says web programming isn't difficult, but also complains for a paragraph
on all the difficulties one would face being a 'web guy'. How Atwood
says not all applications should be web applications, but then ends with
his post title. The fact is, web programming (I include the server side
portion in my umbrella of web programming), is hard, and so is
everything else. Programming is just a hard thing.

The thing that makes it so awesome, is that I can be happy programming
my web apps, Mr. Braude can be happy programming his stuff, and we never
have to interact if we don't want to. He doesn't want to be a web
developer? Fine. More for me.

We can all move on though, since it's all just on the web and should be
taken with a grain of salt anyway.

Move along, nothing to see here…
