--- 
id: 521
author: Daniel Huckstep
title: One Week, One iPhone 5
category: editorial
description: I've my iPhone 5 for a week, let's do a blog post shall we?
published: true
publishedon: 01 Oct 2012 10:00 MDT
slugs: 
- one-week-one-iphone-5
tags: 
- iphone
- ios
- apple
- phone
images: 
  desirehd: 
    small: http://cdn.verboselogging.com/transloadit/small/28/33b6cb81e5d660de91fa44699f23ec/desirehd.jpg
    large: http://cdn.verboselogging.com/transloadit/large/14/f0f0a179b3de4e6631044a403fda71/desirehd.jpg
    original: http://cdn.verboselogging.com/transloadit/original/4f/0b080e31e979e67184931b8157abe9/desirehd.jpg
    medium: http://cdn.verboselogging.com/transloadit/medium/2a/58636640ffcec51e55cec880d9fe4c/desirehd.jpg
---
Last week, I, along with [5 million
others](http://www.businessinsider.com/iphone-5-sales-opening-weekend-2012-9),
got an iPhone 5. I preordered it as soon as I could, and the UPS man
showed up at 9:30 in the morning on the Friday. I had to go to the Telus
store to get a new SIM card since my [HTC Desire
HD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Htc_desire_hd) used the regular sized
SIM and the iPhone 5 uses the nano SIM, 2 sizes smaller. Par for the
course on Apple launch days, Telus’ system was down for most of the day,
so I couldn’t activate my SIM, and hence use the phone, until about 5pm.
No worries, had work to do anyway.

## So is it good?

I’m coming at this not as somebody who’s been using an iPhone 4 or 4S
for the past while. I was on a 3GS until Thanksgiving[^thanksgiving] last
year, at which time Telus had a sweet deal on the [HTC Desire
HD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Htc_desire_hd). At the time it was
still a good phone, but it might have been on the way out, because they
must have been having a blowout sale or something. Anyway, we got this
phone and a good rate plan. It was a nice upgrade from the 3GS, and I
wanted to try the Android setup for something different.

Well, after a year, I got fed up with this Android and HTC crap, so I
got me an iPhone.

## Choices, Choices

<a href="{{.desirehd.original}}"><img src="{{.desirehd.small}}" class="fright bleft bbottom" /></a>

In retrospect, the HTC Desire HD isn’t really a good example of a
quality Android device. Most of friends here that use Android agree
that, despite all the hardware choices in the Android ecosystem, the
only real choice is to buy the Google device, and just run vanilla
Android. So we’re back to no choice.

Speaking of vanilla Android, I had to flash mine to Cyanogenmod7 because
an update to the Telus/HTC ROM started to crash regularly, when
**receiving phone calls**. You know, that thing phones are supposed to
do.

But it was good for a while though, probably just because it was new.

## Music

I used my previous 3GS for music all the time. I tried putting music on
the Desire HD, but I found no application to do syncing that worked with
any reliability. Even once I got music on it, you’re dealing with a
standard filesystem, so you put it here, but this music player expects
it here, and this one expects it there. I couldn’t find a decent music
player either; they were all just terrible. At this point I was already
heavily invested in iTunes, and in the end I just never used the phone
for music.

The iPhone 5 of course plays nice with iTunes, and I use iTunes Match so
all my music is basically just on the phone. Apple kind of broke iTunes
Match in iOS6 since you can’t delete music, it just gets managed for
you. Ignoring that annoyance, I use my phone for music again. The new
EarPods are also nice. They are 1 of 2 earbuds (the other being the Bose
ones) that actually fit in and stay in my ear. They aren’t as good as
the Bose ones, but they are better than anything else. You might have
different mileage with your ears.

## Photo & Video

I tried a number of gallery programs on the Android, but I also had to
get a little program to “reindex” the photos, because they would just
disappear out of the gallery.

**WTF.**

This was happening on the HTC ROM and seemed to go away once I had
flashed CM7.

The camera itself was decent: 8MP stills, 720p video. It took good
pictures, though it felt slow. Video was really good.

The iPhone 5 takes great pictures too, and it’s deadly fast to do so.
Video is great too. I’m happy with it, and that’s what matters.

## The Screen

The screen size was a step down from the Desire HD, which has a 4.3"
screen, but the iPhone 5 screen is 16:9, where the Desire HD screen
is…something else. It’s wider and a tad shorter. After using the Desire
HD for a while, I started to find the size too big (again, coming from a
3GS).

I’m quite happy with the 4" screen on the iPhone 5. It looks good, and
after using various apps that make use of the full height, it seems
about right.

## The Size

Damn it’s thin and light.

## The Speed

Damn it’s fast.

## What do I miss from Android?

The whole master account section is nice. For example, I could sign into
my Google account and then Gmail, Calendar, Contacts works (which is
about the same on the iPhone), but then the Google Reader application
also just works. Other applications that use the Google services could
just work as well.

iOS has some of this now with Twitter and Facebook integration, where
applications can use those accounts without having to sign in again
(Instagram and the official Twitter application for example).

The sharing stuff is nice too. Applications on Android can register
something somewhere that they support sharing things like photos. Some
support sharing multiple things (Google+) and some only a single item
(Twitter). You can open the sharing dialog for something, and it will
let you share it with any of the registered apps. This is nice for apps
like Dropbox, where you can just share something into a Dropbox folder
with the application not needing to know anything about Dropbox. On iOS,
the app would need Dropbox sharing built in.

Dropbox is getting big enough that we might see it integrated into iOS
one day, but Apple would probably have more interest in pushing
Photostream and other services they control.

The global Search button was nice. Since the Desire HD had a hardware
search button, I could hit that in pretty much any application and I’d
get a search dialog. In iOS apps, you may have to hunt for it.

## What am I glad I don’t have to deal with anymore?

The hardware Back button was useless. It rarely actually went back to
somewhere I wanted it.

The general UI for the phone was fairly annoying and terrible. It
doesn’t help that I was originally on the HTC Sense setup, then the ADW
launcher setup (I think…). I tried another one for a bit, but it was
just as bad. So many different UIs, and all were mediocre at best.

## Problems

The wifi connection strength sucks, and is slow. Apple apparently knows
about it, and it’s apparently a software thing, so we should see a fix
soon. Okay cool, whatever. Good thing the LTE is bloody fast.

I occasionally see a little “broken LCD” technicolor line through the
keyboard when inputting my password for the iTunes or App stores. Other
people seem to have this problem, and it only occurs when inputting my
password in those two dialogs, so I’m not concerned that it’s a hardware
problem. The screen looks great the rest of the time.

## Conclusion

I’ll stop rambling. This turned out to be more of a “my old Android vs
my new iPhone” instead of a “one week later” post, but whatever.

Overall, it’s a big step up for me. I was already invested in the Apple
ecosystem when I decided to try Android, and it just made more sense to
go back. If you’re thinking about going back to Apple from your Android
(or other) device, don’t hesitate. If you’re upgrading from a 4S…I don’t
know. I never owned one.

In any regard, it’s not perfect, but it’s a fantastic phone.

[^thanksgiving]: Canadian Thanksgiving
