--- 
id: 480
author: Daniel Huckstep
title: Productivity ∩ Learning = ∅
category: editorial
description: Being productive and learning are mutually exclusive.
published: true
publishedon: 07 Jan 2011 08:00 MST
slugs: 
- productivity-learning
tags: 
- python
- ruby
- haskell
- clojure
- productivity
- learning
---
Do you have a [TODO
list](http://blog.darkhax.com/2010/01/23/what-todo-indeed?) Sure you do.
I bet you have all sorts of cool projects on it, like a better todo list
application, a web spider for some RSS feeds, a search engine
experimentation, a git backend built on riak, and a slew of other ideas
you haven't got around to.

I bet you also have some new programming languages you want to learn.
Maybe expand your scripting language knowledge with some
[Python](http://www.python.org/), break into functional programming with
[Clojure](http://clojure.org/) and [Haskell](http://www.haskell.org/),
and go hardcore OO with
[Smalltalk](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smalltalk).

The first problem you encounter is you need some sort of non-trivial
project to really learn a language. *Hello, World!* only goes so far,
and building a blog 7 times over gets boring quite quick.

So you wake up on a Saturday with some vigor and excitement, and you
think "I'll pump out this little webapp idea with python and django on
AppEngine." You've got stuff to do on Sunday, so you want to try to get
it done by the end of the day.

Now the problem is that by wanting to learn Python with a non-trivial
project, you now have to learn a new non-trivial framework, along with
other various non-trivial libraries. You might be lucky if you get the
basic datamodel laid out with whatever ORM the framework uses.

You can push through and hope you find all the right blog posts and
documentation pages, struggling with some stupid syntax problem or
framework quirk (there's a "django-annoying" library…), sorting out the
deployment issues, and maybe working later into the evening. At this
point, you might have a working application, but the code is terrible
(hey, you're learning), and the application is probably laid out all
wrong. But it works.

## Or.

You can just grab your current favorite language and framework, hammer
the app out in a few hours, and you've still got time to promote your
new app, clean up the code for public consumption, work on another todo
list item, and take your better half out for dinner.

With the first method, you probably learn something, enough even that
the next app won't be so bad to start up. The app might not be pretty
and you probably spent all day working on it. It'll probably crash and
generally isn't that pretty. But you learned something.

With the second method, you got **way** more done, and it's probably a
well built app since you're well versed in the language and framework
you used. But you learned a lot less, if anything at all. No new
language, no new framework, no new programming paradigms.

Learning. I wants it. Productivity. I wants it. I can't have both at the
same time it seems, so what do you do? Suck it up and have a few crap
days of productivity to learn something completely new,[^1] or
specialize like a maniac and crank the productivity through the roof? I
think a big part of it is, are you excited about the project, or excited
about the language (or platform, or framework, etc)?

What do you do? Do you even worry about it? Add your comments below.

[^1]: As opposed to learning a new library in your language of choice,
    which is considerably easier than learning a new language *and*
    framework from scratch.
